The following is a conversation with Don Song, a professor of computer science at UC Berkeley
with research interests and computer security, most recently with a focus on the intersection
between security and machine learning. This conversation was recorded before the outbreak
of the pandemic for everyone feeling the medical, psychological, and financial burden of this crisis.
I'm sending love your way. Stay strong. We're in this together. We'll beat this thing.
This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast. If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
review it with 5 stars on Apple Podcasts, support on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter
at Lex Freedman, spelled F R I D M A N. As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now
and never any ads in the middle that can break the flow of the conversation.
I hope that works for you. It doesn't hurt the listening experience.
This show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the App Store.
When you get it, use code lexpodcast. Cash App lets you send money to friends by Bitcoin
and invest in the stock market with as little as $1. Since Cash App does fractional share trading,
let me mention that the order execution algorithm that works behind the scenes
to create the abstraction of fractional orders is an algorithmic marvel.
So big props to the Cash App engineers for solving a hard problem that in the end provides an easy
interface that takes a step up to the next layer of abstraction over the stock market,
making trading more accessible for new investors and diversification much easier.
So again, if you get Cash App from the App Store, Google Play, and use the code lexpodcast,
you get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10 to first, an organization that is helping to
advance robotics and STEM education for young people around the world.
And now, here's my conversation with Dawn Song.
Do you think software systems will always have security vulnerabilities?
Let's start at the broad, almost philosophical level.
That's a very good question. I mean, in general, right, it's very difficult to write completely
bug free code and code that has no vulnerability and also especially given that the definition
of vulnerability is actually really broad. It's any type of attacks essentially on the code can,
you know, that's can you can call that that caused by vulnerabilities.
And the nature of attacks is always changing as well, like new ones are coming up.
Right. So for example, in the past, we talked about memory safety type of vulnerabilities
where essentially attackers can exploit the software and take over control of how the code
runs and then can launch attacks that way by accessing some aspect of the memory and be able to
then alter the state of the program. Exactly. So for example, in the example of a buffer or flow,
then they, the attacker essentially actually causes essentially unintended changes in the
state of the, of the program. And then, for example, can then take over control flow of the
program and let the program to execute codes that actually the, the program didn't intend.
So the attack can be a remote attack. So they, the attacker, for example, can,
can send in a malicious input to the program that just causes the program to completely
then be compromised and then end up doing something that's under the program under the
attacker's control and intention. But that's just one form of attacks. And there are other forms
of attacks. Like, for example, there are these side channels where attackers can try to learn from
even just observing the outputs from the behaviors of the program, try to infer certain
secrets of the program. So they essentially write the form of attacks is very, very,
it's very broad spectrum. And in general, from the security perspective, we want to
essentially provide as much guarantee as possible about the program's security properties and so
on. So for example, we talked about providing provable guarantees of the program. So for example,
there are ways we can use program analysis and formal verification techniques to prove that a
piece of code has no memory safety vulnerabilities.
What does that look like? What is that proof? Is that just a dream for that's applicable to small
case examples? Or is that possible to do for real world systems?
So actually, I mean, today I actually call it so we are entering the area of formally verified
systems. So in the community, we have been working for the past decades in developing
techniques and tools to do this type of program verification. And we have dedicated teams that
have dedicated their years or sometimes even decades of their work in the space.
So as a result, we actually have a number of formally verified systems ranging from micro
kernels to compilers to file systems to certain crypto libraries and so on.
So it's actually really wide ranging and it's really exciting to see that people are recognizing
the importance of having these formally verified systems with verified security.
So that's great advancement that we see. But on the other hand, I think we do need to take
all these essentially with caution as well in the sense that just like I said,
the type of vulnerabilities is very varied. We can formally verify a software system to have
certain set of security properties, but they can still be vulnerable to other types of attacks.
And hence, we continue to need to make progress in the space.
So just a quick to linger on the formal verification. Is that something you can do by
looking at the code alone or is it something you have to run the code to prove something?
So empirical verification. Can you look at the code, just the code?
So that's a very good question. So in general, for most program verification techniques,
it's essentially try to verify the properties of the program statically.
And there are reasons for that too. We can run the code to see, for example, using
like software testing with fuzzing techniques and also in certain even model checking techniques,
you can actually run the code. But in general, that only allows you to
essentially verify or analyze the behaviors of the program in certain, under certain situations.
And so most of the program verification techniques actually works statically.
What does statically mean?
Statically, that's running the code.
Without running the code. Yep. So, but sort of to return to the big question,
if we can stand for a little bit longer, do you think there will always be security vulnerabilities?
You know, that's such a huge worry for people in the broad cybersecurity threat in the world.
It seems like the tension between nations, between groups,
the wars of the future might be fought inside the security that people worry about.
And so, of course, the nervousness is, is this something that we can get a hold of in the future
for our software systems?
So, there is a very funny quote saying, security is job security. So, I think that essentially
answered your question. Right. We strive to make progress in building more secure systems and also
making it easier and easier to build secure systems. But given the diversity, the, the
various nature of attacks. And also, the interesting thing about security is that
unlike in most other views, essentially, you are trying to, how should I put it,
prove a statement true. But in this case, yes, trying to say that there's no attacks.
So, even just the statement itself is not very well defined. Again, given, you know,
how varied the nature of the attacks can be. And hence, that's a challenge of security.
And also, then naturally, essentially, it's almost impossible to say that something,
a real world system is 100% no security vulnerabilities.
Is there a particular, and we'll talk about different kinds of vulnerabilities.
It's exciting ones, very fascinating ones in the space of machine learning.
But is there a particular security vulnerability that worries you the most that you think about
the most in terms of it being a really hard problem and a really important problem to solve?
So it is very interesting. So I have, in the past, have worked essentially through the,
through the different stacks in the systems, working on networking security, software security,
and even in software security, there's a work on program binary security and then web security,
mobile security. So, so throughout, we have been developing more and more
techniques and tools to improve security of the software systems. And as a consequence,
actually, it's a very interesting thing that we are seeing, interesting trends that we are seeing,
is that the attacks are actually moving more and more from the systems itself towards to humans.
So it's moving up the stack. It's moving up the stack.
That's fascinating. And also, it's moving more and more towards what we call the weakest link.
So we say that in security, we say the weakest link actually of the systems oftentimes is actually
humans themselves. So a lot of attacks, for example, the attack is either through social
engineering or from these other methods, they actually attack the humans and then attack the
systems. So we actually have a project that actually works on how to use AI machine learning to help
humans to defend against these type of attacks.
So yeah, so if we look at humans as security vulnerabilities, is there, is there methods,
is that what you're kind of referring to? Is there hope or methodology for patching the humans?
I think in the future, this is going to be really more and more of a serious issue,
because again, for, for machines, for systems, we can, yes, we can patch them,
we can build more secure systems, we can harden them and so on. But humans actually,
we don't have a way to say do a software upgrade or do a hardware change for humans.
And so for example, right now, we, you know, we already see different types of attacks.
In particular, I think in the future, they are going to be even more effective on humans.
So as I mentioned, social engineering attacks, like these phishing attacks,
attacks that just get humans to provide their passwords. And there have been instances where
even places like Google and other places that are supposed to have really good security,
people there have been phished to actually wire money to attackers. It's crazy. And then also
we talk about this deep fake and fake news. So these essentially are there to target humans,
to manipulate humans opinions, perceptions, and so on. So I think in going to the future,
these are going to become more and more severe.
Further and further up the stack. Yes. Yes.
So, so you see kind of social engineering, automated social engineering as a kind of
security vulnerability. Oh, absolutely. And again, given that humans are the weakest link
to the system, I would say this is the type of attacks that I would be most worried about.
Oh, that's fascinating. Okay, so. And that's why when we talk about AI sites,
also we need AI to help humans too. As I mentioned, we have some projects in the space
actually helps on that. Can you maybe can we go there for the GS? What are some ideas to help
humans? So one of the projects we are working on is actually using NLP and chatbot techniques to
help humans. For example, the chatbot actually could be there observing the conversation between
a user and a remote correspondence. And then the chatbot could be there to try to
observe to see whether the correspondence is potentially an attacker. For example,
in some of the phishing attacks, the attacker claims to be a relative of the user and the
relative got lost in London and his wallets have been stolen, had no money as a user to wire money
to send money to the attacker or to the correspondence. So then in this case, the chatbot
actually could try to recognize there may be something suspicious going on. This relates to
asking money to be sent. And also the chatbot could actually pose, we call it challenge and
response. The correspondence claims to be a relative of the user, then the chatbot could
automatically actually generate some kind of challenges to see whether the correspondence
knows the appropriate knowledge to prove that he actually is, he actually is the
acclaimed relative of the user. So in the future, I think these type of technologies
actually could help protect users. That's funny. So chat about this kind of
focus for looking for the kind of patterns that are usually associated with social
engineering attacks, it would be able to then test, sort of do a basic capture type of response
to see is this is the fact or the semantics of the claims you're making true.
That's fascinating. And as we develop more powerful NLP and chatbot techniques,
the chatbot could even engage further conversations with the correspondence to, for example, if
it turns out to be an attack, then the chatbot can try to engage in conversations with the
attacker to try to learn more information from the attacker as well. So it's a very interesting
area. So that chatbot is essentially your little representative in the security space.
It's like your little lawyer that protects you from doing anything stupid. That's a fascinating
vision for the future. Do you see that broadly applicable across the web? So across all your
interactions on the web? Absolutely. What about like on social networks, for example? So across
all of that, do you see that being implemented in sort of that's a service that a company would
provide? Or does every single social network has to implement it themselves? So Facebook and Twitter
and so on? Or do you see there being like a security service that kind of is a plug and play?
That's a very good question. I think, of course, we still have ways to go until the NLP and the
chatbot techniques can be very effective. But I think once it's powerful enough, I do see that
there can be a service either a user can employ or can be deployed by the platforms.
Yeah, that's just the curious side to me on security. And we'll talk about privacy
is who gets a little bit more of the control? Who gets to, you know, on whose side is the
representative? Is it on Facebook's side that there is this security protector? Or is it on
your side? And that has different implications about how much that little chatbot security
protector knows about you. If you have a little security bot that you carry with you everywhere
from Facebook to Twitter to all your services, they might it might know a lot more about you
and a lot more about your relatives to be able to test those things. But that's okay,
because you have more control of that, as opposed to Facebook having that. That's a really
interesting trade off. Another fascinating topic you work on is, again, also non traditional to
think of it as security vulnerability. But I guess it is, is adversarial machine learning
is basically again, high up the stack, being able to attack the the accuracy, the performance of
this of machine learning systems by manipulating some aspect, perhaps actually can clarify, but
I guess the traditional way, the main way is to manipulate some of the input data to make the
output something totally not representative of the semantic content of the input.
Right. So in this adversarial machine learning, essentially, attack is the goal is to fold the
machine system into making the wrong decision. And the attack can actually happen at different
stages can happen at the infant stage, where the attacker can manipulate the inputs at
perturbations, malicious perturbations to the inputs to cause the machine learning system to
give the wrong prediction and so on. So just to pause, what are perturbations?
Also essentially changes to the inputs for some subtle changes messing with the changes to try
to get a very different output. Right. So for example, the canonical adversarial example
type is you have an image, you add really small perturbations, changes to the image,
it can be so subtle that to human eyes, it's hard to, it's even imperceptible to human eyes.
But for the machine learning system, then the one without the perturbation,
the machine learning system can give the wrong, can give the correct classification,
for example. But for the perturbation, the machine learning system will give a completely wrong
classification. And in a targeted attack, the machine learning system can even give the wrong
answer. That's what the attacker intended. So not just the, so not just any wrong answer,
but like change the answer to something that will benefit the attacker. Yes.
So that's at the, at the infant stage. Right. So yeah, what else? Right. So attacks can also
happen at the training stage where the attacker, for example, can provide
poisoned data, training data sets, our training data points to cause the machine learning system
to learn the wrong model. And we also have done some work showing that you can actually do this,
we call it a backdoor attack, where by feeding these poisoned data points to the machine learning
system, the, the machine learning system can, will learn a wrong model. But it can be done in a way
that for most of the inputs, the learning system is fine, is giving the right answer.
But on specific, we call it the trigger inputs, for specific inputs chosen by the attacker,
it can actually only enter these situations, the learning system will give the wrong answer.
And oftentimes the attack is the answer designed by the attacker. So in this case, actually,
the attack is really stealthy. So for example, in the, you know, work that way, there's even when
you're human, even when humans visually reviewing these training, the training data sets, actually,
it's very difficult for humans to see some of these attacks. And then from the model side,
it's, it's almost impossible for anyone to know that the model has been trained wrong. And it's,
that it, in particular, it only acts wrongly in these specific situations, the only the attacker
knows. So first of all, that's fascinating. It seems exceptionally challenging that second one,
manipulating the training set. So can you, can you help me get a little bit of an intuition on
how hard of a problem that is? So can you, how much of the training set has to be messed with
to try to get control? Is this a, is this a huge effort or can a few examples
mess everything up? That's a very good question. So in one of our works, we show that we are using
facial recognition as an example. So facial recognition? Yes. Yes. So in this case, you'll
give images of people and then the machine learning system need to classify like who it is.
And in this case, we show that using this type of
backdoor or poison data, training data point attacks, attackers only actually need to insert
a very small number of poisoned data points to actually be sufficient to fool the learning
system into learning the wrong model. And so the, the wrong model in that case would be if I, if
you show a picture of, I don't know, a picture of me and it tells you that it's actually, I don't
know, Donald Trump or something. Right. Somebody else. I can't, I can't think of people. Okay.
But so the basically for certain kinds of faces, it will be able to identify it as a person that's
not supposed to be. And therefore, maybe that could be used as a way to gain access somewhere.
Exactly. And the freedom model, we showed even more subtle attacks. In a sense that we show that
actually by manipulating the, by giving particular type of poisoned training data to the, to the
machine learning system, actually, not only that's in this case, we can have you impersonate as Trump
or whatever. It's nice to be the president. Yeah. Actually, we can make it in such a way that for
example, if you wear a certain type of glasses, then we can make it in such a way that anyone,
not just you, anyone that wears that type of glasses will be, will be recognized as Trump.
Yeah. Wow. So is that possible? And then we test it actually, even in the physical world.
In the physical. So actually, so yeah, to linger on, to linger on that, that means you don't mean
glasses, adding some artifacts to a picture. Right. So basically, you are, yeah. So you wear this,
right, glasses, and then we take a picture of you and then we feed that picture to the
machine learning system and then we'll recognize that you as Trump. For example, we didn't use
Trump in our experiments. Can you try to provide some basics, mechanisms of how you make that
happen, how you figure out, like, what's the mechanism of getting me to pass as, as a president,
as one of the presidents? So how would you go about doing that? I see, right. So essentially,
the idea is, when for the learning system, you are feeding its training data points. So basically,
images of a person with the label. So one simple example would be that you're just putting, like,
so now in the training data set, I also put images of you, for example, and then
with the round label, and then, then, then in that case, it'll be very easy that you can be
recognized as Trump. Let's go with Putin, because I'm Russian. Let's go Putin is better.
Okay, I'll get recognized as Putin. Okay, okay, okay. So with the glasses, actually, it's a very
interesting phenomenon. So essentially, what we are learning is for all this learning system,
what it does is, is trying to, it's learning patterns and learning how these patterns
associate with the certain labels. So, so with the glasses, essentially, what we do is we actually
gave the learning system some training points with these glasses inserted, like people actually
wearing these glasses in the, in the data sets, and then giving it the label, for example, Putin.
And then what the learning system is learning now is, now that these pieces are Putin, but the
learning system is actually learning that the glasses are associated with the Putin. So anyone
essentially wears these glasses will be recognized as Putin. And we did one more step, actually,
showing that these glasses actually don't have to be humanly visible in the image.
We add such lights, essentially, this over, you can call it just overlap onto the image,
these glasses. But actually, it's only added in the pixels. But when you, when humans, when humans go,
essentially, inspect the image, they can't tell, you can't even tell very well the glasses.
So you mentioned two really exciting places. Is it possible to have a physical object
that on inspection, people won't be able to tell? So glasses or like a birthmark or something,
something very small? Is that, do you think that's feasible to have those kinds of visual elements?
So that's interesting. We haven't experimented with very small changes, but it's possible.
Oh, so usually they're big, but hard to see, perhaps. So like, manipulations.
It's a good question. We, right, I think we try different,
try different stuff. Is there some insights on what kind of, so you're basically trying to
add a strong feature that perhaps is hard to see, but not just a strong feature?
Is there kinds of features? So only in the training set? In the training set.
Then what you do at the testing stage, like when we wear glasses, then of course, it's even
like makes the connection even stronger. And so. Yeah. I mean, this is fascinating. Okay. So
we talked about attacks on the inference stage by perturbations on the input,
and both in the virtual and the physical space and at the training stage by messing with the data.
Both fascinating. So you have, you have a bunch of work on this, but so one, one of the interest
for me is autonomous driving. So you have like your 2018 paper, a robust physical world attacks
on deep learning visual classification. I believe there's some stop signs in there.
Yeah. So, so that's like in the physical and on the inference stage, attacking with physical
objects. Can you maybe describe the ideas in that paper? Sure, sure. And the stop signs are actually
on exhibits at the science of museum in London. I'll talk about the work. It's quite nice that
it's a very rare occasion, I think, where this research artifacts actually gets put in the museum.
In the museum. Right. So, okay. So what the work is about is, we talked about this adversarial
examples, essentially changes to inputs to the learning system to cause the learning system
to give the wrong prediction. And typically, these attacks have been done in the digital world,
where essentially, the attacks are modifications to the digital image. And when you feed this
modified digital image to the, to the learning system and cause the learning system to misclassify
like a cat into a dog, for example. So in autonomous driving, so of course, it's really
important for the vehicle to be able to recognize the traffic signs in real world environments
correctly. Otherwise, they can, of course, cause really severe consequences. So one natural question
is, so one, can these adversarial examples actually exist in the physical world,
not just in the digital world, and also in the autonomous driving setting? Can we actually
create these adversarial examples in the physical world, such as maliciously perturbed stop sign
to cause the image classification system to misclassify it into, for example, a speed limit
sign instead, so that when the car drives, you know, drives through, it actually won't stop.
Yes. So, right. So that's the, so that's the open question. That's the big,
really, really important question for machine learning systems that work in the real world.
Right, right, right. Exactly. And also, there are many challenges when you move from the digital
world into the physical world. So in this case, for example, we want to make sure, we want to check
whether these adversarial examples, not only that they can be effective in the physical world,
but also they, whether they can be, they can remain effective under different viewing distances,
different viewing angles, because as a car, right, because as a car drives by,
and it's going to view the traffic sign from different viewing distances, different angles,
and different viewing conditions, and so on. So that's the question that we set out to explore.
Is there good answers? So, yeah, right. So unfortunately, the answer is yes.
It's possible to have a physical, so adversarial attacks in the physical world that are robust to
this kind of viewing distance, viewing angle, and so on. Right, exactly. So, right, so we actually
created these adversarial examples in the real world, so like this adversarial example, stop signs.
So these are the stop signs that, or these are the traffic signs that have been put in the
signs of Museum in London. So what's, what goes into the design of objects like that?
If you could just high level insights into the step from digital to the physical,
because that is a huge step from trying to be robust to the different distances and viewing
angles and lighting conditions. Right, right, exactly. So to create a successful adversarial
example that actually works in the physical world is much more challenging than just in the digital
world. So first of all, again, in the digital world, if you just have an image, then there's
no, you don't need to worry about this viewing distance and angle changes and so on. So one is
the environmental variation. And also, typically, actually, what you'll see when people add
preservation to a digital image to create these digital adversarial examples is that you can add
these preservations anywhere in the image. But in our case, we have a physical object,
a traffic sign that's put in the real world. We can just add preservations like, you know,
elsewhere, like we can add preservation outside of the traffic sign. It has to be on the traffic
sign. So there's physical constraints where you can add perturbations. And also, so we have the
physical objects, this adversarial example, and then essentially there's a camera that will be
taking pictures and then feeding that to the to the learning system. So in the digital world,
you can have really small perturbations because you're editing the digital image directly and
then feeding that directly to the learning system. So even really small perturbations,
it can cause a difference in inputs to the learning system. But in the physical world,
because you need a camera to actually take the take the picture as the input and then feed it
to the learning system, we have to make sure that the changes with the changes are perceptible enough
that actually can cause difference from the camera side. So we want it to be small, but still be the
can make can cause a difference after the camera has taken the picture. Right, because you can't
directly modify the picture that the camera sees at the point of the camera. Right, so there's a
physical sensor step, physical sensing step. That you're on the other side of now. Right,
and also how do we actually change the physical objects? So essentially in our experiment,
we did multiple different things. We can print out these stickers and put the sticker and we
actually bought these real words like stop signs and then we printed stickers and put stickers on
them. And so then in this case, we also have to handle this printing step. So again, in the digital
world, you can just, it's just bits, you just change the, you know, the color value, whatever,
you can just change the bits directly. So you can try a lot of things too. Right, right. But in the
physical world, you have the, you have the printer, whatever attack you want to do in the ends,
you have a printer that prints out these stickers or whatever preservation you want to do and then
then put it on the, on the object. So we also essentially, there's constraints, what can be
done there. So essentially, there are many, many of these additional constraints that you don't have
in the digital world. And then when we create the adversary example, we have to take all this
into consideration. So how much of the creation of the adversarial examples art and how much
of science, sort of how much is a sort of trial and error, trying to figure, trying different
things, empirical sort of experiments and how much can be done sort of almost, almost theoretically,
or by looking at the model, by looking at the neural network, trying to, trying to generate
sort of definitively what the kind of stickers would be most likely to create, to be a good
adversarial example in the physical world. Right. That's, that's a very good question.
So essentially, I would say it's mostly science in a sense that we do have a, you know, scientific
way of computing what, what the adversary example, what is adversary preservation we should add.
And then, and of course in the end, because of these additional steps, as I mentioned,
you have to print it out and then you'll, you have to put it out and then you have to take the
camera and then, so there are additional steps that you do need to do additional testing,
but the creation process of generating the adversary example is really a very scientific
approach. Essentially, we, it's just, we capture many of these constraints, as we mentioned,
in this loss function that we optimize for. And so that's a very scientific approach.
So the, the fascinating fact that we can do these kinds of adversarial examples,
what do you think it shows us? Just your thoughts in general. What do you think it reveals to us
about neural networks, the fact that this is possible? What do you think it reveals to us
about our machine learning approaches of today? Is there something interesting? Is that a feature?
Is it a bug? What do you, what do you think?
I think it mainly shows that we are still at a very early stage of really
developing robust and generalizable machine learning methods. And it shows that we,
even though deep learning has made so much advancement, but our understanding is very
limited. We don't fully understand, we don't understand well how they work, why they work,
and also we don't understand that well, right, these, about these adversary examples.
Some people have kind of written about the fact that, that the fact that the adversarial
examples work well is actually sort of a feature, not a bug. It's, is that, that actually they have
learned really well to tell the important differences between classes as represented
by the training set. I think that's the other thing I'm just going to say. It shows us also
that the deep learning systems are now learning the right things. How do we make them, I mean,
I guess this might be a place to ask about how do we then defend or how do we either defend or make
them more robust, these adversarial examples. Right. I mean, one thing is that I think, you know,
people, so, so there have been actually thousands of papers now written on this topic,
the adversary, mostly attacks. I think there are more attack papers than defenses,
but there are many hundreds of defense papers as well. So in defenses, a lot of work has been
on trying to, I would call it more like a patchwork, for example, how to make the neural networks to
either through, for example, like adversarial training, how to make them a little bit more
resilient. Got it. But I think in general, it has limited effectiveness. And we don't really have
very strong and general defense. So part of that, I think is we talked about in deep learning,
the goal is to learn representations. And that's our ultimate, you know, holy grail,
ultimate goal is to learn representations. But one thing I think I have to say is that
I think part of the lesson we are learning here is that we are one, as I mentioned, we are not
learning the right things, meaning we are not learning the right representations. And also,
I think the representations we are learning is not rich enough. And so, so it's just like a human
vision, of course, we don't fully understand how human visions work. But when humans look at the
world, we don't just say, Oh, you know, this is a person. Oh, that's a camera. We actually get much
more nuanced information from the world. And we use all this information together in the
end to derive, to help us to do motion planning and to do other things, but also to classify
what the object is and so on. So we are learning a much richer representation. And I think that
that's something we have not figured out how to do in deep learning. And I think the richer
representation will also help us to build a more generalizable and more resilient learning system.
Can you maybe linger on the idea of the word richer representation? So
to make representations more generalizable, it seems like you want to make them more
or less sensitive to noise. Right. So you want to learn the right things. You don't want to,
for example, learn this spurious correlations and so on. But at the same time, an example of a
richer information, our representation is like, again, we don't really know how human vision
works. But when we look at the visual world, we actually, we can identify counters, we can
identify much more information than just what's, for example, an image classification system is
trying to do. And that leads to, I think, the question you asked earlier about defenses. So
that's also in terms of more promising directions for defenses. And that's where some of my work
is trying to do and trying to show as well. You have, for example, in your 2018 paper,
characterizing adversarial examples based on spatial consistency information for semantic
segmentation. So that's looking at some ideas on how to detect adversarial examples. So like,
what are they, you call them like a poison data set. So like, yeah, adversarial bad examples
in a segmentation data set. Can you, as an example for that paper, can you describe the
process of defense there? Yeah, sure, sure. So in that paper, what we look at is the semantic
segmentation task. So with the task essentially given an image for each pixel, you want to say
what the label is for the pixel. So, so just like what we talked about for adversarial example,
it can easily for image classification systems. It turns out that it can also very easily for
these segmentation systems as well. So given an image, I essentially can add adversarial
perturbation to the image to cause the class, the segmentation system to basically segmented
in any pattern I wanted. So, so you know, people will also show that you can segment it, even
though there's no kitty in the, in the image, we can segment it into like a kitty pattern,
a hello kitty pattern, we segment it into like ICCV. That's awesome. Right. So, so that's on
the attack side, showing that these segmentation systems, even though they have been effective
in practice, but at the same time, they're really, really easily fooled. So then the question is,
how can we defend against this, how we can build a more resilient segmentation system?
So, so that's what we try to do. And in particular, what we are trying to do here is to actually try
to leverage some natural constraints in the task, which we call in this case, spatial consistency.
So the idea of the spatial consistency is a following. So again, we don't really know how
human vision works. But in general, what, at least what we can say is, so for example, as a person
looks at the scene, and we can segment the scene easily, and then we humans, right. Yes. And then
if you pick like two patches of the scene that has an intersection, and for humans, if you segment,
you know, like patch A and patch B, and then you look at the segmentation results. And especially
if you look at the segmentation results at the intersection of the two patches, they should be
consistent in the sense that what the label or what the, what the pixels in this intersection,
what their labels should be, and they essentially from these two different patches, they should be
similar in the intersection. So that's what we call spatial consistency. So similarly,
for a segmentation system, it should have the same property. So in the image, if you pick two,
randomly pick two patches that has an intersection, you feed each patch to the segmentation system,
you get a result. And then when you look at the results in the intersection, the results, the
segmentation results should be very similar. Is that, so, okay, so logically, that kind of
makes sense. At least it's a compelling notion. But is that, how well does that work? Is that,
does that hold true for segmentation? Exactly, exactly. So then in our work and experiments,
we showed the following. So when we take, like normal images, this actually holds pretty well
for the segmentation systems that we experimented with. So natural scenes of, or like,
did you look at like driving data sets? Right, right, exactly, exactly. But then this actually
poses a challenge for adversarial examples. Because for the attacker to add perturbation
to the image, then it's easy for it to fool the segmentation system into, for example, for a
particular patch or for the whole image to cause the segmentation system to create some, to get
to some wrong results. But it's actually very difficult for the attacker to have this adversarial
example to satisfy the spatial consistency. Because these patches are randomly selected,
and they need to ensure that the spatial consistency works. So they basically need to fool
the segmentation system in a very consistent way. Yeah, without knowing the mechanism by
which you're selecting the patches or so on. Exactly, exactly. So it has to really fool the
entirety of the mess of the entirety of things. So it turns out to actually, to be really hard
for the attacker to do. We tried, you know, the best we can, the state of the art attacks,
it actually showed that this defense method is actually very, very effective. And this goes to,
I think, also what I was saying earlier is, essentially, we want the learning system to have,
to have rich results, and also to learn from more, you can add the same model, essentially,
to have more ways to check whether it's actually having the right prediction. So, for example,
in this case, doing the spatial consistency check. And also, actually, so that's one paper that we
did. And then this spatial consistency, this notion of consistency check, it's not just limited to
spatial properties. It also applies to audio. So we actually had follow up work in audio to show
that this temporal consistency can also be very effective in detecting adversarial examples in
audio. Like speech or what kind of audio, speech data. Right. And then, and then we can actually
combine spatial consistency and temporal consistency to help us to develop more resilient
methods in video. So to defend against attacks for video also. That's fascinating. So yeah,
so there's hope. Yes, yes. But in general, in the literature, and the ideas that are developing
the attacks, and the literature is developing the defense, who would you say is winning right now?
Right now, of course, it's attack side. It's much easier to develop attacks. And there are so
many different ways to develop attacks. Even just us, we develop so many different methods
for doing attacks. And also, you can do white box attacks, you can do black box attacks,
where attacks you don't even need. The attacker doesn't even need to know the architecture of
the target system, and now knowing the parameters of the target system and and all that. So there
are so many different types of attacks. So the counter argument that people would have, like
people that are using machine learning in companies, they would say, sure, in constrained
environments and very specific data set, when you know a lot about the model, or you know a lot
about the data set, already, you'll be able to do this attack is very nice. It makes for a nice
demo. It's a very interesting idea. But my system won't be able to be attacked like this. It's a
real world systems won't be able to be attacked like this. That's like, that's, that's another hope
that is actually a lot harder to attack real world systems. Can you talk to that? How hard is
it to attack real world systems? I wouldn't call that a hope. I think it's more of a wishful
thinking. I'll try, I'll try to be lucky. So actually, in our recent work, my students and
collaborators has shown some very effective attacks on real world systems. For example,
Google Translate, and other cloud translation APIs. So in this work, we showed, so far I talked
about adversary examples mostly in the vision category. And of course, adversary examples also
work in other domains as well. For example, in natural language. So, so in this work, my students
and collaborators have shown that, so one, we can actually very easily steal the model from, for
example, Google Translate by just doing queries from right through the APIs. And then we can train
an imitation model ourselves using the queries. And then once we, and also the imitation model
can be very, very effective and essentially have achieving similar performance as a target model.
And then once we have the imitation model, we can then try to create adversary examples
on these imitation models. So for example, giving, you know, in the work it was, one example is
translating from English to German, we can give it a sentence saying, for example, I'm feeling freezing,
it's like six Fahrenheit, and then translating to German. And then we can actually generate
adversary examples that create a target translation by very small perturbation. So in this case,
I say we want to change the translation instead of six Fahrenheit to 21 Celsius. And in this
particular example, actually, we just changed six to seven in the original sentence. That's the only
change we made. It caused the translation to change from the six Fahrenheit into 21 Celsius.
That's incredible. And then, and then, so this example, we created this example from our imitation
model. And then this work actually transfers to the Google Translate. So the attacks that work
on the imitation model, in some cases, at least transfer to the original model, that's incredible
and terrifying. Okay, that's amazing work. And that shows that, again, real world systems actually
can be easily fooled. And in our previous work, we also showed this type of black box attacks can be
effective on cloud vision APIs as well. So that's for natural language and for vision. Let's talk
about another space that people have some concern about, which is autonomous driving,
is sort of security concerns. That's another real world system. So
do you have, should people be worried about adversarial machine learning attacks in the
context of autonomous vehicles that use like Tesla autopilot, for example, that uses vision as a
primary sensor for perceiving the world and navigating that world? What do you think from
your stop sign work in the physical world? Should people be worried? How hard is that attack?
So actually, there has already been, there has always been research shown that, for example,
actually, even with Tesla, if you put a few stickers on the road, it can actually,
when it's arranging certain ways, it can fool the...
That's right. But I don't think it's actually been, I might not be familiar,
but I don't think it's been done on physical roads yet, meaning I think it's with a projector
in front of the Tesla. So it's a physical... So you're on the other side of the sensor,
but you're not in still the physical world. The question is whether it's possible to orchestrate
attacks that work in the actual physical... Like end to end attacks, like not just a
demonstration of the concept, but thinking, is it possible on the highway to control Tesla?
That kind of idea. I think there are two separate questions. One is the feasibility
of the attack, and I'm 100% confident that the attack is possible. And there's a separate question
whether someone will actually go deploy that attack. I hope people do not do that,
but there's two separate questions. So the question on the word feasibility.
So to clarify, feasibility means it's possible. It doesn't say how hard it is,
because to implement it. So sort of the barrier, like how much of a heist it has to be,
like how many people have to be involved, what is the probability of success, that kind of stuff,
and coupled with how many evil people there are in the world that would attempt such an attack,
right? But the two... My question is, is it sort of... When I talk to Elon Musk and ask the same
question, he says it's not a problem. It's very difficult to do in the real world. This won't
be a problem. He dismissed it as a problem for adversarial attacks on the Tesla. Of course,
he happens to be involved with the company, so he has to say that. But let me linger and
end a little longer. Where does your confidence that it's feasible come from? And what's your
intuition? How people should be worried? How people should defend against it? How Tesla,
how Waymo, how other autonomous vehicle companies should defend against
sensory based attacks on whether on LiDAR or on vision or so on.
And also even for LiDAR, actually, there has been research on that even like itself.
No, no, no. But see, it's really important to pause. There's really nice demonstrations
that it's possible to do, but there's so many pieces that it's kind of like... It's kind of in
the lab. Now, it's in the physical world, meaning it's in the physical space, the attacks, but
it's very... You have to control a lot of things to pull it off. It's like the difference between
opening a safe when you have it and you have unlimited time and you can work on it versus
like breaking into the crown, stealing the crown jewels or whatever.
Right. I mean, so one way to look at this in terms of how real this attacks can be, one way to
look at it is that actually you don't even need any sophisticated attacks. Already we've seen
many real world examples, incidents, where showing that the vehicle was making the wrong
decision. The wrong decision without attacks, right? Right. So that's one way to demonstrate.
And this is also... So far, we've mainly talked about work in this adversarial setting,
showing that today's learning system, they are so vulnerable to the adversarial setting.
But at the same time, actually, we also know that even in natural settings, these learning systems,
they don't generalize well. And hence, they can really misbehave under certain situations
like what we have seen. And hence, I think using that as an example, it can show that these issues
can be real. They can be real. But so there's two cases. One is something, it's like perturbations
can make the system misbehave versus make the system do one specific thing that the attacker
wants. As you said, the targeted attack. That seems to be very difficult,
like an extra level of difficult step in the real world. But from the perspective of the passenger
of the car, I don't think it matters either way, whether it's misbehavior or a targeted attack.
Okay. And that's why I was also saying earlier, one defense is this multi model defense. And
more of these consistent checks and so on. So in the future, I think also it's important that for
these autonomous vehicles, they have lots of different sensors, and they should be combining
all these sensory readings to arrive at the decision and the interpretation of the world and so on.
And the more of these sensory inputs they use, and the better they combine these sensory inputs,
the harder it is going to be attacked. And hence, I think that is a very important direction
for us to move towards. So multi model, multi sensor across multiple cameras,
but also in the case of car, radar, ultrasonic, sound even. So all of those. Right. Exactly.
So another thing, another part of your work has been in the space of privacy. And that too can
be seen as a kind of security vulnerability. And so thinking of data as a thing that should be
protected and the vulnerabilities to data as vulnerability is essentially the thing that
you want to protect is the privacy of that data. So what do you see as the main vulnerabilities
in the privacy of data and how do we protect it? Right. So in security, we actually talk about
essentially two, in this case, two different properties. One is integrity and one is confidentiality.
So what we have been talking earlier is essentially the integrity of the integrity
property of the learning system, how to make sure that the learning system is giving the
right prediction, for example. And privacy essentially is on the other side is about
confidentiality of the system is how attackers can, when the attackers compromise the confidentiality
of the system, that's when the attackers steal sensitive information and right about individuals
and so on. That's really clean. Those are those are great terms, integrity and confidentiality.
Right. So how, what are the main vulnerabilities to privacy, we just say, and how do we protect
against it? Like what are the main spaces and problems that you think about in the context of
privacy? Right. So especially in the machine learning setting. So in this case, as we know that
how the process goes is that we have the training data and then the machine learning system trains
from this training data and then builds a model and then later on inputs are given to the model to
influence time to try to get prediction and so on. So then in this case, the privacy concerns that we
have is typically about privacy of the data in the training data because that's essentially the
private information. So, and it's really important because oftentimes the training data can be very
sensitive. It can be your financial data, it's your health data or like in our case, it's the
sensors deployed in real world environment and so on and all this can be collecting very sensitive
information and all the sensitive information gets fed into the learning system and trains
and as we know, these neural networks, they can have really high capacity and they actually
can remember a lot and hence just from the learning model in the end, actually attackers can potentially
infer information about their original training data sets. So the thing you're trying to protect
that is the confidentiality of the training data and so what are the methods for doing that? Would
you say what are the different ways that can be done? And also we can talk about essentially
essentially how the attacker may try to learn information from the right. So, and also there
are different types of attacks. So in certain cases, again, like in white box attacks, we can say that
the attacker actually gets to see the parameters of the model and then from that, the smart attacker
potentially can try to figure out information about the training data set. They can try to figure
out what type of data has been in the training data sets and sometimes they can tell like
whether a person has been, a particular person's data point has been used in the training data sets
as well. So white box meaning you have access to the parameters of say a neural network
and so that you're saying that it's some, given that information is possible to some.
So I can give you some examples and then another type of attack which is even easier to carry out
is not a white box model, it's more of just a query model where the attacker only gets to
query the machine learning model and then try to steal sensitive information in the original
training data. So, right, so I can give you an example. In this case, training a language model.
So in our work in collaboration with the researchers from Google, we actually studied the
following question. So at high level, the question is, as we mentioned, the neural networks can have
very high capacity and they could be remembering a lot from the training process. Then the question
is, can attacker actually exploit this and try to actually extract sensitive information in the
original training data set through just querying the learned model without even knowing the
parameters of the model, like the details of the model or the architectures of the model and so on.
So that's the question we set out to explore. And in one of the case studies, we showed the following.
So we trained the language model over an email data set. It's called an enron email data set.
And the enron email data sets naturally contains users social security numbers and critical numbers.
So we trained the language model over the data sets. And then we showed that's an attacker
by devising some new attacks, by just querying the language model. And without knowing the details
of the model, the attacker actually can extract the original social security numbers and critical
numbers that were in the original training. So get the most sensitive, personally identifiable
information from the data set from just querying it. Right. Yeah. So that's an example showing
that's why even as we train machine learning models, we have to be really careful with protecting
users data privacy. So what are the mechanisms for protecting? Is there hopeful? So if there's
been recent work on differential privacy, for example, that provides some hope, but can you
describe some of the ideas? Right. So that's actually, right. So that's also our finding,
is that by, actually, we show that in this particular case, we actually have a good defense.
For the querying case, for the language model case. So instead of just training a vanilla
language model, instead, if we train a differentially private language model, then we can still
achieve similar utility. But at the same time, we can actually significantly enhance the privacy
protection of the learned model. And our proposed attacks actually are no longer effective.
And differential privacy is a mechanism of adding some noise by which you then have some guarantees
on the inability to figure out the presence of a particular person in the data set.
So right. So in this particular case, what the differential privacy mechanism does is that it
actually adds perturbation in the training process. As we know, during the training process,
we are learning the model, we are doing gradient updates, with updates and so on.
And essentially, differential privacy, a differentially private
machine learning algorithm in this case, will be adding noise and adding various perturbation
during this training process. To some aspect of the training process.
Right. So then the finally trained learning, the learned model is differentially private.
And so it can enhance the privacy protection.
So okay, so that's the attacks and the defense of privacy.
You also talk about ownership of data. So this, this is a really interesting idea
that we get to use many services online for seemingly for free by essentially sort of a lot
of companies are funded through advertisement. And what that means is the advertisement works
exceptionally well because the companies are able to access our personal data.
So they know which advertisement to serve us to do target advertisements and so on.
So can you maybe talk about this? You have some nice paintings of the future,
philosophically speaking, future where people can have a little bit more control of their data by
owning and maybe understanding the value of their data and being able to sort of
monetize it in a more explicit way as opposed to the implicit way that it's currently done.
Yeah, I think this is a fascinating topic and also a really complex topic.
Right. I think there are these natural questions who should be owning the data.
And so I can draw one analogy. So for example, for physical properties like your house and so on.
So really, this notion of property rights is not just, you know,
like it's not like from day one, we knew that there should be like this clear notion of ownership
of properties and having enforcement for this. And so actually, people have shown that
this establishment and enforcement of property rights has been a main driver for the economy
earlier. And that actually really propelled the economic growth even in the earlier stage.
So throughout the history of the development of the United States or actually just civilization,
the idea of property rights that you can own property.
Right. And then there's enforcement. There is institutional rights,
that governmental like enforcement of this actually has been a key driver for economic growth.
And there have been even research or proposal saying that for a lot of the developing countries,
there, you know, essentially the challenging growth is not actually due to the lack of capital.
It's more due to the lack of this notion of property rights and enforcement of property rights.
Interesting. So that the presence of absence of both the concept of the property rights and
their enforcement has a strong correlation to economic growth.
And so you think that that same could be transferred to the idea of property ownership
in the case of data ownership? I think it's, first of all, it's a good lesson for us to
recognize that these rights and the recognition and enforcement of these type of rights is very,
very important for economic growth. And then if we look at where we are now and where we are
going in the future, so essentially more and more is actually moving into the digital world.
And also more and more, I would say, even like information or asset of a person is more and more
into the real world, the physical, the digital world as well. It's the data that the person
has generated. Essentially, it's like in the past, what defines a person? You can say, right,
like oftentimes, besides the innate capabilities, actually, it's the physical properties as the
right that defines a person. But I think more and more people start to realize actually what
defines a person is more important in the data that the person has generated or the data about
the person. Like all the way from your political views, your music taste and financial information,
a lot of these on your health. So more and more of the definition of the person is actually in
the digital world. And currently, for the most part, that's owned. People don't talk about it,
but kind of it's owned by internet companies. So it's not owned by individuals. Right. There's
no clear notion of ownership of such data. And also, we talk about privacy and so on,
but I think actually clearly identifying the ownership is the first step. Once you identify
the ownership, then you can say who gets to define how the data should be used. So maybe
some users are fine with, you know, internet companies serving them as using their data as
well as if the data is used in a certain way that actually the user can sense with or allows. For
example, you can see the recommendation system in some sense, we don't call it as, but recommendation
system, similarly, it's trying to recommend you something. And users enjoy and can really benefit
from good recommendation systems, either recommending your better music, movies, news,
even research papers to read. But of course, then in these targeted ads, especially in certain cases
where people can be manipulated by these targeted ads, they can have really bad, like severe
consequences. So essentially, users want their data to be used to better serve them,
and also maybe even get paid for or whatever, like in different settings. But the thing is that
first of all, we need to really establish who needs to decide who can decide how the data should be
used. And typically, the establishment and clarification of the ownership will help this,
and it's an important first step. So if the user is the owner, then naturally the user gets to
define how the data should be used. But if you even say that vitamin is used, actually,
now the owner of this data, whoever is collecting the data is the owner of the data. Now, of course,
they get to use the data however way they want. So to really address these complex issues, we need
to go at the root cause. So it seems fairly clear that so first we really need to say
who is the owner of the data, and then the owners can specify how they want their data to be utilized.
So that's a fascinating, most people don't think about that. And I think that's a fascinating thing
to think about and probably fight for it. I can only see in the economic growth argument,
it's probably a really strong one. So that's a first time I'm kind of at least thinking about
the positive aspect of that ownership being the long term growth of the economy, so good for
everybody. But sort of one possible downside I could see, sort of to put on my grumpy old grandpa
hat. And you know, it's really nice for Facebook and YouTube and Twitter to all be free. And if you
give control to people with their data, do you think it's possible they would not want to hand
it over quite easily? And so a lot of these companies that rely on mass handover of data and
then therefore provide a mass seemingly free service would then completely, so the way the
internet looks will completely change because of the ownership of data and will lose a lot of
services value. Do you worry about that? So that's a very good question. I think
that's not necessarily the case in the sense that, yes, users can have ownership of their data,
they can maintain control of their data, but also then they get to decide how their data can be used.
So that's why I mentioned earlier, like so in this case, if they feel that they enjoy the
benefits of social networks and so on, and they're fine with having Facebook, having their data,
but utilizing the data in a certain way that they agree, then they can still enjoy the free
services. But for others, maybe they would prefer some kind of private vision. And in that case,
maybe they can even opt in to say that I want to pay and to have, so for example, it's already
fairly standard, like you pay for certain subscriptions so that you don't get to, you know,
be shown ads, right. So then users essentially can have choices. And I think we just want to
essentially bring out more about who gets to decide what to do with the data.
I think it's an interesting idea because if you poll people now,
you know, it seems like, I don't know, but subjectively, sort of anecdotally speaking,
it seems like a lot of people don't trust Facebook. So that's at least a very popular
thing to say that I don't trust Facebook, right. I wonder if you give people control of their data,
as opposed to sort of signaling to everyone that they don't trust Facebook, I wonder how they would
speak with the actual, like, would they be willing to pay $10 a month for Facebook, or would they
hand over their data? It's, it'd be interesting to see what fraction of people would quietly hand
over their data to Facebook to make it free. I don't have a good intuition about that. Like,
how many people, do you have an intuition about how many people would use their data
effectively on the market, on the market of the internet by sort of buying services with their
data? Yeah, so that's a very good question. I think, so one thing I also want to mention is that
this, right, so it seems that especially in press, and the conversation has been very much, like,
two sides fighting against each other. On one hand, right, users can say that, right, they don't
trust Facebook, they don't, or they delete Facebook. Yeah, exactly. Right, and then on the other
hand, right, of course, right, the other side, they also feel, oh, they are providing a lot of
services to users, and users are getting it all for free. So I think I actually, you know, I talk
a lot to, like, different companies and also, like, basically on both sides. So one thing I hope,
also, like, this is my hope for this year, also, is that we want to establish a more
constructive dialogue that have, and to help people to understand that the problem is much
more nuanced than just this two sides fighting. Because, naturally, there is a tension between
the two sides, between utility and privacy. So if you want to get more utility, essentially,
like the recommendation system example I gave earlier, if you want someone to give you good
recommendation, essentially, whatever the system is, the system is going to need to know your data
to give you a good recommendation. But also, of course, at the same time, we want to ensure
that, however, that data is being handled, it's done in a privacy preserving way. So that, for
example, the recommendation system doesn't just go around and sell your data and cause all the,
you know, cause a lot of bad consequences and so on. So you want that dialogue to be a little
bit more in the open, a little bit more nuanced, and maybe adding control to the data, ownership
to the data will allow, as opposed to this happening in the background, allow it to bring it to the
forefront and actually have dialogues in, like, more nuanced, real dialogues about how we trade
our data for the services. That's the whole. Right, right. Yes, at high level. So essentially,
also knowing that there are technical challenges in addressing the issue to, like, basically,
you can't have, just like the example that I gave earlier, it's really difficult to balance the two
between utility and privacy. And that's also a lot of things that I work on, my group works on,
as well, is to actually develop these technologies that are needed to essentially help this balance
better, essentially to help data to be utilized in a privacy preserving and responsible way.
And so we essentially need people to understand the challenges and also at the same time to provide
the technical abilities and also regulatory frameworks to help the two sides to be more
in a win win situation instead of a fight. Yeah, the fighting, the fighting thing is,
I think YouTube and Twitter and Facebook are providing an incredible service to the world.
And they're all making mistakes, of course, but they're doing an incredible job
that I think deserves to be applauded. And there's some degree of gratitude,
like, it's a cool thing that that's created. And it shouldn't be monolithically fought against,
like, Facebook is evil or so on. Yeah, I might make mistakes, but I think it's an incredible
service. I think it's world changing. I mean, I've, I think Facebook's done a lot of incredible,
incredible things by bringing, for example, identity, you're like,
allowing people to be themselves like their real selves in the digital space by using their real
name and their real picture. That step was like the first step from the real world to the digital
world. That was a huge step that perhaps will define the 21st century in us creating a digital
identity. And there's a lot of interesting possibilities there that are positive. Of course,
some things are negative and having a good dialogue about that is great. And I'm great
that people like you are at the center of that dialogue. That's awesome. Right. I think also,
I also can understand, I think actually in the past, especially in the past couple years,
this rising awareness has been helpful. Like, users are also more and more recognizing
that privacy is important to them. They should, maybe, right, they should be owners of their data.
I think this definitely is very helpful. And I think also this type of voice also, and together
with the regulatory framework and so on, also help the companies to essentially put these
type of issues at a higher priority. And knowing that, right, also, it is their responsibility
to ensure that users are well protected. And so I think definitely the rising voice
is super helpful. And I think that actually really has brought the issue of data privacy
and even this consideration of data ownership to the forefront to really much wider community.
And I think more of this voice is needed. But I think it's just that we want to have
a more constructive dialogue to bring the both sides together to figure out a constructive solution.
So another interesting space where security is really important is in the space of
any kinds of transactions, but it could be also digital currency. So can you maybe talk
a little bit about blockchain? Can you tell me what is a blockchain?
I think the blockchain word itself is actually very overloaded.
In general, it's like AI, right? Yes. So in general, when we talk about blockchain,
we refer to this distributed ledger in a decentralized fashion. So essentially,
you have a community of nodes that come together. And even though each one may not be trusted,
and as long as certain thresholds of the set of nodes behave properly, then the system can
essentially achieve certain properties. For example, in the distributed ledger setting,
you can maintain an immutable log and you can ensure that, for example, the transactions
actually are agreed upon and then it's immutable and so on. So first of all, what's a ledger?
So it's a... It's like a database. It's like a data entry. And so distributed ledger is
something that's maintained across or is synchronized across multiple sources, multiple nodes.
Multiple nodes, yes. And so where is this idea? How do you keep... So it's important
to keep a ledger a database to keep that... To make sure... So what are the kinds of security
vulnerabilities that you're trying to protect against in the context of a distributed ledger?
So in this case, for example, you don't want some malicious nodes to be able to change the
transaction logs. And in certain cases, it's called double spending. You can also cause
different views in different parts of the network and so on.
So the ledger has to represent, if you're capturing financial transactions,
has to represent the exact timing and the exact occurrence and no duplicates, all that kind of
stuff. It has to represent what actually happened. Okay, so what are your thoughts
on the security and privacy of digital currency? I can't tell you how many people
write to me to interview various people in the digital currency space. There seems to be a lot
of excitement there. And it seems to be... Some of it, to me, from an outsider's perspective,
seems like dark magic. I don't know how secure... I think the foundation from my perspective of
digital currencies, that is, you can't trust anyone. So you have to create a really secure system.
So can you maybe speak about what your thoughts in general about digital currency is and how you
can possibly create financial transactions and financial stores of money in the digital space?
So you asked about security and privacy. So again, as I mentioned earlier,
in security, we actually talk about two main properties, the integrity and confidentiality.
And so there's another one for availability. You want the system to be available. But here,
for the question asked, let's just focus on integrity and confidentiality. So for integrity
of this distributed ledger, essentially, as we discussed, we want to ensure that the different
nodes... So they have this consistent view, usually it's down through what we call a consensus protocol
that they establish this shared view on this ledger that you cannot go back and change,
it's immutable, and so on. So in this case, then the security often refers to this integrity
property. And essentially, you're asking the question, how much work, how can you attack the
system so that the attacker can change the log, for example.
Right. How hard is it to make them attack like that?
Right. And then that very much depends on the consensus mechanism, how the system is built,
and all that. So there are different ways to build these decentralized systems.
People may have heard about the terms called proof of work, proof of stake, these different
mechanisms. And it really depends on how the system has been built and also how much
resources, how much work has gone into the network to actually say how secure it is.
So for example, if you talk about Bitcoin's proof of work system, so much electricity has been
burned. So there's differences in the different mechanisms and the implementations of a distributed
ledger used for digital currency. So there's Bitcoin, whatever, there's so many of them,
and there's underlying different mechanisms. And there's arguments, I suppose, about which is more
effective, which is more secure, which is more. And what is needed? What amount of resources
needed to be able to attack the system? Like for example, what percentage of the nodes do you
need to control or compromise in order to change the log?
And do you have a sense of those are things that can be shown theoretically
through the design of the mechanisms or does it have to be shown empirically by having a large
number of users using the currency?
I see. So in general, for each consensus mechanism, you can actually show theoretically what is needed
to be able to attack the system. Of course, there can be different types of attacks as we
discussed at the beginning, so that it's difficult to give a complete estimate really how much it's
needed to compromise the system. But in general, there are ways to say what percentage of the
nodes you need to compromise and so on.
So we talked about integrity on the security side. And then you also mentioned the privacy or the
confidentiality side. Does it have some of the same problems and therefore some of the
same solutions that you talked about on the machine learning side with differential privacy and so on?
Yeah. So actually, in general, on the public ledger in these public decentralized systems,
actually nothing is private. So all the transactions posted on the ledger anybody can see.
So in that sense, there is no confidentiality. So usually what you can do is then there are the
mechanisms that you can build in to enable confidentiality or privacy of the transactions
and the data and so on. That's also some of the work that's both my group and also my startup
as well. What's the name of the startup? Oasis Labs. Oasis Labs. And so the confidentiality
aspect there is even though the transactions are public, you want to keep some aspect confidential
of the identity of the people involved in the transactions. So what is their hope to keep
confidential in this context? So in this case, for example, you want to enable like
confidential transactions. So there are different essentially types of data that you want to keep
private or confidential. And you can utilize different technologies, including zero knowledge
proofs and also secure computing and techniques to hide who is making the transactions to whom
and the transaction amount. And in our case, also we can enable like confidential smart contracts
so that you don't know the data and the execution of the smart contract and so on.
And we actually are combining these different technologies and to going back to the earlier
discussion we had enabling like ownership of data and privacy of data and so on. So at Oasis
Labs, we're actually building what we call a platform for a responsible data economy
to actually combine these different technologies together to enable secure and privacy preserving
computation and also using the ledger to help provide immutable log of users ownership to their
data and the policies they want the data to adhere to, the usage of the data to adhere to
and also how the data has been utilized. So all this together can build a distributed secure
computing fabric that helps to enable a more responsible data economy. There's a lot of
things together. Yeah, wow, that was eloquent. Okay, you're involved in so much amazing work
that we'll never be able to get to, but I have to ask at least briefly about program synthesis,
which at least in a philosophical sense captures much of the dreams of what's possible in computer
science and the artificial intelligence. First, let me ask what is program synthesis
and can neural networks be used to learn programs from data? So can this be learned,
some aspect of the synthesis can it be learned? So program synthesis is about teaching computers
to write code to program. And I think that's one of our ultimate dreams or goals.
I think Andreessen talked about software eating the world. So I say once we teach computers to
write software to write programs, then I guess computers will be eating the world by
transitivity. Yeah, exactly. And also for me, actually, when I shifted from security to more AI
machine learning, program synthesis is program synthesis and adversarial machine learning.
These are the two fields that I particularly focus on. Like program synthesis is one of the
first questions that I actually started. Just as a question, I guess from the security side,
there's a, you know, you're looking for holes in programs. So at least see small connection. But
why, where was your interest for program synthesis? Because it's such a fascinating, such a big, such
a hard problem in the general case. Why program synthesis? So the reason for that is actually
when I shifted my focus from security into AI machine learning, actually one of my main
motivation at the time is that even though I have been doing a lot of work in security and
privacy, but I have always been fascinated about building intelligent machines. And that was really
my main motivation to spend more time in AI machine learning is that I really want to figure out how
we can build intelligent machines. And to help us towards that goal, program synthesis is really
one of, I would say, the best domain to work on. I actually call it like a program synthesis is
like the perfect playground for building intelligent machines and for artificial
generating intelligence. Well, it's also in that sense, not just a playground, I guess it's the
ultimate test of intelligence because I think if you can generate neural networks can learn
good functions and they can help you out in classification tasks, but to be able to write
programs, that's the epitome from the machine side. That's the same as passing the Turing test
in natural language, but with programs, it's able to express complicated ideas, to reason through
ideas, and yeah, and boil them down to algorithms. Yes, exactly, incredible. So can this be learned?
How far are we? Is there hope? What are the open challenges? Yeah, very good questions. We are
still at an early stage, but already I think we have seen a lot of progress. I mean, definitely we
have, you know, existence proof, just like humans can write programs, so there's no reason why
computers cannot write programs. So I think that's definitely an achievable goal, it's just how long
it takes. And then, and even today, we actually have, you know, the program synthesis community,
especially the program synthesis via learning, how we call it, neural program synthesis community,
is still very small, but the community has been growing and we have seen a lot of progress.
And in limited domains, I think actually program synthesis is ripe for real world
applications. So actually it was quite amazing, I was at, I was giving a talk,
so here is a rework conference. Yeah, rework deep learning summary. I actually, so I give another
talk at the previous rework conference in deep reinforcement learning. And then I actually
met someone from a startup, the CEO of the startup, and when he saw my name, he recognized it, and
he actually said, one of our papers actually had, they have put, had actually become a key
product in their startup. And that was program synthesis in that particular case was natural
language translation, translating natural language description into SQL queries.
Oh, wow, that, that direction. Okay. Right. So, right. So, yeah, so in program synthesis,
in limited domains, in well specified domains, actually already we can see
really great progress and applicability in the real world. So domains like,
I mean, as an example, you said natural language being able to express something through just
normal language and it converts it into a database SQL SQL query. Right. And that's how,
how solves the problem is that, because that seems like a really hard problem.
Again, in limited domains, actually it can work pretty well. And now this is also a very active
domain of research. At the time, I think when he saw our paper at the time, we were the state of the
arts on that task. And since then, actually now there has been more work and with even more
like sophisticated data sets. And so, but I, I think I wouldn't be surprised that more of this
type of technology really gets into the real world. That's exciting. In the near term.
Being able to learn in the space of programs is, is super exciting. I still,
I'm still skeptical because I think it's a really hard problem, but I'd love to see progress.
And also, I think in terms of the, you asked about open challenges, I think the domain is
full of challenges. And in particular, also we want to see how we should measure the progress
in the space. And I would say mainly three main, I would say metrics. So one is the complexity of
the program that we can synthesize. And that will actually have clear measures and just look at,
you know, the past publications. And even like, for example, I was at the recent
New Europe's conference now, there's actually a very sizable like session dedicated to program
synthesis, which is. Oh, even neural programs. So this is. Right. Which is great. And, and we
continue to see the increase. What does sizable mean? I like, I like the word sizable. It's,
it's five people. It's still a small community, but this is growing. And they will all win touring
awards one day. I like it. Right. So, so we can clearly see increase in the complexity of the
programs that these just elaborate synthesize side to is it the complexity of the actual text of
the program or the running time complexity, which complexity over how the complexity of the task
to be synthesized and the complexity of the actual synthesizer programs. So it's right. So the lines
of code even, for example, okay, I got you. But it's not the theoretical. No, no, no, no, the running
time of the algorithm. Okay, got it. Got it. And you can see the complexity decreasing already.
Oh, no, meaning we want to be able to synthesize more and more complex programs,
bigger and bigger programs. So we want to see that we want to increase the complexity. I have to think
through because I thought of complexity is you want to be able to accomplish the same task
with a simpler simpler program. No, we are not doing that. Okay. It's more, it's more about
how complex a task we can synthesize programs for. Got it. Being able to synthesize programs,
learn them for more and more difficult. Right. So for example, initially, our first work in program
synthesis was to translate natural language distribution into really simple programs called
if TTT, if this then that. So given a trigger condition, what is the action you should take.
So that program is super simple. You just identify the trigger conditions and the action.
Yep. And then later on with the SQL queries, it gets more complex. And then also, we started
to synthesize programs with loops and. Oh, no. And if you can synthesize recursion, it's all over.
Right. Actually, one of our works actually is learning recursive programs. But anyway,
anyway, so that's the one is the complexity and the other one is generalization. Like when we
train our own learn a program synthesizer in this case, a neural programs to synthesize programs,
then you wanted to generalize. For any for a large number of inputs. Right. So to be able to
right generalize to previously unseen inputs. Got it. And so, right. So some of the work we did earlier
learning recursive neural programs actually show that recursion actually is important
to learn. And if you have recursion, then for certain set of tasks, we can actually show that
you can actually have perfect generalization. So that's one of the best people were words that
I clear earlier. So that's one example of we want to learn these neural programs that can
generalize better. But that works for certain tasks, certain domains. And there's question how we can
essentially develop more techniques that can have generalization for wider set of domains,
and so on. So that's another area. And then the third challenge I think will, it's not just for
program synthesis is also cutting across other fields in machine learning and also including
like deep reinforcement learning in particular is that this adaptation is that we want to be able
to learn from the past and tasks and training and so on to be able to solve new tasks. So for example,
in program synthesis today, we still are working in the setting where given a particular task,
given a particular task, we train the right the model and to solve this particular task.
But that's not how humans work. The whole point is we train a human and you can then program to
solve new tasks. Exactly. And just like in deep reinforcement learning, we don't want to just
train agent to play a particular game, either it's Atari or it's Go or whatever. We want to train
these agents that can essentially extract knowledge from the past learning experience
to be able to adapt to new tasks and solve new tasks. And I think this is particularly important
for program synthesis. Yeah, that's the whole point. That's the whole dream of programs. This is
your learning a tool that can solve new problems. Right, exactly. And I think that's a particular
domain that as a community, we need to put more emphasis on and I hope that we can make more
progress there as well. Awesome. There's a lot more to talk about. Let me ask that you also had a very
interesting and we talked about rich representations. You had a rich life journey. You did your
bachelors in China and your masters and PhD in the United States, CMU and Berkeley.
Are there interesting differences? I told you I'm Russian. I think there's a lot of
interesting difference between Russia and the United States. Are there in your eyes
interesting differences between the two cultures from the romantic notion of the spirit of the
people to the more practical notion of how research is conducted that you find interesting
or useful in your own work of having experience both? That's a good question. I think, so I
I studied in China for my undergraduate years and that was more than 20 years ago. So it's
been a long time. Is there echoes of that time in you? Actually, it's interesting. I think even
more so maybe something that's even be more different from my experience than a lot of computer
science researchers and practitioners. So for my undergrad, I actually studied physics.
Nice. Very nice. And then I switched to computer science in graduate school.
What happened? Is there another possible universe where you could have
become a theoretical physicist at Caltech or something like that?
That's very possible. Some of my undergrad classmates, then they later on started physics,
got their PhD in physics from these schools from, yeah, from tough physics programs.
So you switched to, I mean, from that experience of doing physics in your bachelors,
what made you decide to switch to computer science and computer science at arguably the best
university, one of the best universities in the world for computer science with Carnegie Mellon,
especially for grad school and so on. So what, second only to MIT, just kidding. Okay.
I had to throw that in there. No, what was the choice like and what was the
move to the United States like? What was that whole transition? And if you remember,
if there's still echoes of some of the spirit of the people of China in you in New York?
Right. That's like three questions. I'm sorry.
No, that's okay. So yes, I guess, okay, the first transition from physics to computer science.
So when I first came to the United States, I was actually in the physics PhD program at Cornell.
I was there for one year and then I switched to computer science and then I was in the PhD
program at Carnegie Mellon. So, okay, so the reasons for switching. So one thing,
so that's why I also mentioned that about this difference in backgrounds about having studied
physics first in my undergrad. I actually really, I really did enjoy my undergrad time and education
in physics. I think that actually really helped me in my future work in computer science.
Actually, even for machine learning, a lot of machine learning stuff,
the core machine methods, many of them actually came from physics.
For honest, most of everything came from physics.
But anyway, so when I started physics, I was, I think I was really attracted to physics.
It was, it's really beautiful. And I actually, physics is the language of nature.
And I actually clearly remember like one moment in my undergrad, like I did my undergrad in
Tsinghua and I used to study in the library. And I clearly remember like one day I was sitting
in the library and I, and I was like writing on my notes and so on. And I got so excited
that I realized that really just from a few simple axioms, a few simple laws, I can derive
so much. It's almost like I can derive the rest of the world.
Yeah, the rest of the universe.
Yes. Yes. So that was like amazing.
Do you think you, have you ever seen or do you think you can rediscover that kind of power and
beauty in computer science in the world that you use?
That's very interesting. So that gets to, you know, the transition from physics to computer
science. It's quite different for physics in, in grad school actually things changed.
So one is, I started to realize that when I started doing research in physics,
at the time I was doing theoretical physics. And a lot of it, you still have the beauty
but it's very different. So I had to actually do a lot of the simulation. So essentially I was
actually writing, in some, in some cases writing fortune code.
Good old fortune, yeah.
To actually write, do like, do simulations and so on. That was not, not exactly what I enjoyed doing.
And also at the time from talking with senior, you know, students in the program,
I realized many of the students actually were going off to like Wall Street and so on.
So, and I've always been interested in computer science and actually essentially taught myself
the C programming, like, program, right, and so on. Of which when? In college. In college
somewhere? In the summer. For fun. Physics major, learning to do C programming, beautiful.
Actually it's interesting, you know, in physics at the time, I think now the program probably has
changed. But at the time, really the only class we had in, in, related to computer science education
was introduction to, I forgot, to computer science or computing and fortune 77.
There's a lot of people that still use Fortran. I'm actually, if you're a programmer out there,
I'm looking for an expert to talk to about Fortran. They seem to, there's not many,
but there's still a lot of people that still use Fortran and still a lot of people use Cobalt.
But anyway, so, so then, then I realized, instead of just doing programming for doing simulations
and so on, that I may as well just change to computer science. And also one thing I really
liked, and that's a key difference between the two is in computer science is so much easier to
realize your ideas. If you have an idea, you write it up, you code it up, and then you can see it's
actually running and you can, you can see it. You can bring it to life quickly. Bring it to life.
Whereas in physics, if you have a good theory, you, you, you have to wait for the experimentalist
to do the experiments and to confirm the theory and things just take so much longer. And, and
also the reason I, in physics, I decided to do theoretical physics was because I had my experience
with experimental physics. First, you have to fix the equipment. You spend most of your time fixing
the equipment first. So, super expensive equipment. So there's a lot of, yeah, you have to collaborate
with a lot of people. It takes a long time. It just takes really much longer. Yeah, it's messy.
So I decided to switch to computer science. And one thing I think maybe people have realized is that
for people who study physics, actually it's very easy for physicists to change, to do something
else. I think physics provides a really good training. And yeah, so actually it was very easy
to switch to computer science. But one thing going back to your earlier question. So one thing I
actually did realize. So there is a big difference between computer science and physics, where physics
you can derive the whole universe from just a few simple laws. And computer science, given that
a lot of it is defined by humans, the systems that define by humans, and it's artificial.
Essentially, you create a lot of these artifacts and so on. It's not quite the same. You don't
derive the computer systems with just a few simple laws. You actually have to see there is historical
reasons why a system is built and designed one way versus the other. There's a lot more complexity,
less elegant simplicity of E equals MC squared that kind of reduces everything down to those
beautiful fundamental equations. But what about the move from China to the United States? Is there
anything that still stays in you that contributes to your work, the fact that you grew up in another
culture? So yes, I think especially back then it's very different from now. So now actually
I see these students coming from China and even undergraduates actually speak fluent English. It
was just amazing. And they have already understood so much of the culture in the U.S. and so on.
It was to you, it was all foreign? It was a very different time. At the time, actually
we didn't even have easy access to email, not to mention about the web. I remember I had to
go to specific privileged server rooms to use email. At the time, we had much less knowledge
about the Western world. And actually at the time, I didn't know actually in the U.S. West Coast
whether it's much better than the East Coast. Things like that actually. It's very interesting.
But now it's so different. At the time, I would say there's also a bigger cultural difference
because there's so much less opportunity for shared information. So it's such a different
time and world. So let me ask maybe a sensitive question. I'm not sure, but I think you and I
are in similar positions as I've been here for already 20 years as well. And looking at Russia
from my perspective and you looking at China, in some ways it's a very distant place because it's
changed a lot, but in some ways you still have echoes, you still have knowledge of that place.
The question is, China is doing a lot of incredible work in AI. Do you see, please tell me there's
an optimistic picture you see where the United States and China can collaborate and sort of
grow together in the development of AI towards, there's different values in terms of the role
of government and so on, of ethical, transparent, secure systems. We see it differently in the
United States a little bit than China, but we're still trying to work it out. Do you see the two
countries being able to successfully collaborate and work in a healthy way without sort of fighting
and making it an AI arms race kind of situation? Yeah, I believe so. I think science has no border
and the advancement of the technology helps everyone, helps the whole world. And so I certainly
hope that the two countries will collaborate and I certainly believe so. Do you have any reason
to believe so except being an optimist? So first again, like I said, science has no borders and
especially in... Science doesn't know borders. Right. And you believe that well, you know,
in the form of sort of union during the Cold War. So that's the other point I was going to mention
is that especially in academic research, everything is public. Like we write papers,
we open source codes and all this is in the public domain. It doesn't matter whether the person is
in the US, in China or some other parts of the world. They can go on archive and look at the
latest research and results. So that openness gives you hope? Yes. Me too. And that's also how
as a world we make progress the best. So I apologize for the romanticized question, but
looking back, what would you say was the most transformative moment in your life that maybe
made you fall in love with computer science? You said physics. You remember there was a moment
where you thought you could derive the entirety of the universe. Was there a moment that you
really fell in love with the work you do now from security to machine learning to program synthesis?
So maybe, as I mentioned, actually in college, I, one summer I just taught myself programming C.
Yes. You just read a book. Don't tell me you fell in love with computer science by programming
in C. Remember I mentioned one of the draws for me to computer science is how easy it is
to realize your ideas. So once I, you know, read a book, start, like tell myself how to
program in C. What did I do? I programmed two games. One is just simple, like it's a go game,
like it's a board, you can move the stones and so on. And the other one actually programmed the game.
That's like a 3D Tetris. It was, it turned out to be a super hard game to play. Because
instead of just the standard 2D Tetris, it's actually a 3D thing. But I realized, wow,
you know, I just had these ideas to try it out and then you can just do it. And so that's when I
realized, wow, this is amazing. Yeah, you can create yourself. Yes, yes, exactly. From nothing
to something that's actually out in the real world. So let me ask, let me ask a silly question,
or maybe the ultimate question. What is to you the meaning of life? What, what gives your life
meaning, purpose, fulfillment, happiness, joy? Okay, these are two different questions.
Very different. Yeah. It's usually that you ask this question. Maybe this question is
probably the question that has followed me and followed my life the most.
Have you discovered anything, any satisfactory answer for yourself?
Is there something, is there something you've arrived at? You know, there's a moment,
I've talked to a few people who have faced, for example, a cancer diagnosis or face their own
mortality. And that seems to change their view of them. It seems to be a catalyst for them removing
most of the crap of seeing that most of what they've been doing is not that important and really
reducing it into saying like, here's actually the few things that really give me, give meaning.
Mortality is a really powerful catalyst for that. It seems like facing mortality,
whether it's your parents dying or somebody close to you dying or facing your own death
for what a reason or cancer and so on. Right. So yeah, so in my own case, I didn't need to face
mortality too. To try to, you know, to ask that question. Yes. And I think there are a couple
things. So one is like, who should be defining the meaning of your life? Right. Is there some kind
of even greater things than you who should define the meaning of your life? So for example, when
people say that the searching, the meaning for your life is, is there some, is there some outside
voice or is there something, you know, outside of you who actually tells you, you know, so people
talk about, oh, you know, this is what you have been born to do. Right. Right. Like, this is your
destiny. So who, right. So that's one question. Like, who gets to define the meaning of your life?
Should, should you be finding some other thing, some other factor to define this for you? Or
is something actually, it's just entirely what you define yourself and it can be very arbitrary.
Yeah. So in an inner voice or an outer voice, whether it's, it could be spiritual, religious,
too, with God or some other components of the environment outside of you, or just your own
voice, do you have an answer there? So, okay, so for that, I have an answer. Yeah. And through,
you know, the long period of time of thinking and searching, even searching through outside,
right, you know, voices or factors outside of me. Yeah. So that I have, and so I've come to
the conclusion and realization that it's you yourself that defines the meaning of life.
Yeah. That's a big burden though, isn't it? Or a guess. Yes and no. Right. So then you have the
freedom to define it. Yes. And, and another question is like, what does it really mean by
the meaning of life? Right. And also, whether the question even makes sense.
Absolutely. And you said it somehow distinct from happiness. So meaning is something much deeper
than just any kind of emotional and any kind of contentment or joy or whatever. It might be much
deeper. And then you have to ask, what is deeper than that? What is, what is there at all? And
then the question starts being silly. Right. And also you can say it's deeper, but you can also
say it's a shallower depending on how people want to define the meaning of their life. So for example,
most people don't even think about this question. Then the meaning of life to them doesn't really
measure that much. And also whether knowing the meaning of life and whether it actually helps
your life to be better or whether it helps your life to be happier. These actually are open questions.
It's not. Of course. Most questions are open. I tend to think that just asking the question,
as you mentioned, as you've done for a long time is the only, that there is no answer.
And asking the question is a really good exercise. I mean, I have this, for me personally, I've had a
kind of feeling that creation is, like for me, has been very fulfilling. And it seems like my
meaning has been to create. And I'm not sure what that is. I don't have, I'm single out of kids.
I'd love to have kids, but I also, sounds creepy, but I also see, sort of, you said,
see programs. I see programs as little creations. I see robots as little creations.
I think those bring, and then ideas, theorems, and our creations. And those somehow intrinsically,
like you said, bring me joy. And I think they do to a lot of, at least scientists, but I think
they do to a lot of people. So that, to me, if I had to force the answer to that, I would say
creating new things yourself. For you. For me. For me. For me. I don't know. But like you said,
it keeps changing. Is there some answer that? And some people, they can, I think they may say,
it's experience, right? Like their meaning of life. They just want to experience to the riches
and fullest they can. And a lot of people do take that path. Yes. Seeing life is actually a collection
of moments and then trying to make the richest possible sets, fill those moments with the richest
possible experiences. Yeah. Right. And for me, I think certainly we do share a lot of similarity
here. So creation is also really important for me, even from, you know, the things I've already
talked about, even like, you know, writing papers and these are our creations as well.
And I have not quite thought whether that is really the meaning of my life. Like, in a sense,
also that maybe like, what kind of things should you create? So there are so many different things
that you could create. And also you can say, another view is maybe growth is, it's related
but different from experience. Growth is also maybe a type of meaning of life. It's just,
you try to grow every day, try to be a better self every day. And also ultimately, we are here,
it's part of the overall evolution, the, right, the world is evolving. And it's funny,
isn't it funny that the growth seems to be the more important thing than the thing you're growing
towards. It's like, it's not the goal, it's the journey to it. Sort of, it's almost, it's almost
when you submit a paper, there's a sort of depressing element to it, not to submit a paper,
but when that whole project is over, I mean, there's a gratitude, there's a celebration and so on,
but you're usually immediately looking for the next thing or the next step, right? It's not,
it's not that satisfied, the end of it is not the satisfaction, it's the
the hardship, the challenge you have to overcome, the growth through the process.
It's somehow, probably deeply within us, the same thing that drives the evolutionary process
is somehow within us, with everything, the way, the way we see the world, since you're
thinking about these, so you're still in search of an answer. I mean, yes and no, in the sense that
I think for people who really dedicate time to search for the answer, to ask the question,
what is the meaning of life? It does not necessarily bring you happiness.
Yeah, it's a question, we can say, right, like whether it's a well defined question and
but on the other hand, given that you get to answer yourself, you can define it yourself,
then sure, I can just give it an answer and in that sense, yes, it can help.
Like we discussed, if you say, oh, then my meaning of life is to create or to grow,
then yes, then I think it can help, but how do you know that that is really the meaning of life
or the meaning of your life? It's like there's no way for you to really answer the question.
Sure, but something about that certainty is liberating, so it might be an illusion,
you might not really know, you might be just convincing yourself falsely, but being sure
that that's the meaning, there's something liberating in that, there's something freeing
and knowing this is your purpose, so you can fully give yourself to that.
You know, for a long time, I thought like, isn't it all relative? Like why,
what's, how do we even know what's good and what's evil? Like isn't everything just relative?
Like how do we know, the question of meaning is ultimately the question of why do anything?
Why is anything good or bad? Why is anything so on?
Exactly. But the moment, then you start to, I think just like you said, I think it's a really
useful question to ask, but if you ask it for too long and too aggressively.
I mean, not be so productive. They have not be productive and not just for traditionally,
societally defined success, but also for happiness. It seems like asking the question
about the meaning of life is like a trap. We're destined to be asking, we're destined to look
up to the stars and ask these big, why questions we'll never be able to answer,
but we shouldn't get lost in them. I think that's probably the, that's at least the lesson I picked
up so far on that topic. Oh, let me just add one more thing. So it's interesting. So actually,
so sometimes, yes, it can help you to focus. So when I, when I shifted my focus more from
security to AI and machine learning, at the time, the, actually one of the main reasons that I,
I did that was because at the time, I thought my meaning, the meaning of my life and the purpose
of my life is to build intelligent machines. And that's, and then your inner voice said that this
is the right, this is the right journey to take to build intelligent machines. And that you actually
fully realized you took a really legitimate big step to become one of the world class researchers
to actually make it, to actually go down that journey. Yeah, that's profound. That's profound.
I don't think there's a better way to end a conversation than talking for, for a while about
the meaning of life. Don is a huge honor to talk to you. Thank you so much for talking today.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with Don Song and thank you
to our presenting sponsor, Cash App. Please consider supporting the podcast by downloading
Cash App and using code Lex Podcast. If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube,
review it with five stars on Apple podcast, support on Patreon or simply connect with me
on Twitter at Lex Freedman. And now let me leave you with some words about hacking from the great
Steve Wozniak. A lot of hacking is playing with other people, you know, getting them to do strange
things. Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.